Now that we are able to sign up, let's also add some functionality to ensure that we can sign in
and for that, we obviously have our login page and when we enter something here, we reach our post login
route here.
Now in there we still have the old dummy code where we just find our default user which by the way won't
exist anymore because we deleted it
and then we would create a session.
This is obviously not the approach I want to use anymore,
instead what I want to do is I want to find a user in here but I want to find the user by the email
the user entered,
so let's first of all extract that. Let's extract the email from the request body and let's extract
the password from the request body,
these are two pieces of information I need for signing a user in.
And then here I'll not use find by ID but find one to find one user with a specific e-mail
and there should be only one user with an email in the database and I'll find the user by looking for
the email field in the documents and comparing it to the e-mail value we are extracting here.
Now if I find a user here
so if I make it into here and I then have a user, then I know that we can check the password next.
If I don't have a user here, so if user is undefined,
I didn't find a user in the database and then I can simply return here,
not execute the other code and simply redirect back to login for now because the login failed because
we tried to use an e-mail which does not exist in the database as we didn't find a user for it. If we
make it past
this if check, we know that the e-mail exists but now we need to validate the password of course. We'll do this
with the bcrypt package again because the password is of course stored in a hashed form
and I mentioned that we can't reverse this,
so how can we now compare the password?
Well remember that bcrypt was responsible for creating the hash, bcrypt uses a certain algorithm
for that
and we can essentially pass the password the user entered into bcrypt and let bcrypt compare
it to the hashed value and bcrypt can then find out if the hashed value does make sense, taking into
account the algorithm that is used for creating that for the password you entered as plain text.
So if that plaintext password, if you would hash it could result in the hash password and if the answer
is true, then you know the user entered a valid password. And for this, brypt has the compare function
and there we enter the password
we want to check,
so the password we extract from the incoming request and then the hashed value against we want to compare
it
and that is found in our user document which we get from the database and there of course in the
password field.
Now this also returns a promise,
so here we can add then and a catch block.
Now if we have an error here,
so if we fail to compare this, then I also want to redirect back to the login page but if we make it
into the then block, then I want to check whether we were successful.
Now important, with compare we'll only face an error
if something goes wrong, not if the passwords do not match. In both a matching and a non-matching case,
we make it into the then block and result will be a boolean that is true if the passwords are equal,
so we could also name this do match to make this clearer and it will be false
if they are not equal.
So here we can check if do match is true,
that means the passwords are equal, the user entered a valid password and then we could return to not
execute any other code,
we could return a redirect to the starting page.
If we don't make it into there, then we want to redirect back to the login page because then the user
entered an invalid password.
Now we also want to set a session as we did it before
and that session code should only be set if we have a matching password,
so if the user did authenticate. Then we can still set is logged in,
we can still store the user in the session because we still need the user object and the user here keep
in mind is the user we retrieved from the database and we want to save that session and only redirect
in that session after we saved it successfully.
Therefore we should also return this to avoid code execution of this line because the callback here
will execute asynchronously,
so this needs to be returned to not execute this line here, in here
we don't need to return then because after this line, this line can't be reached because this line is in
a callback in a different function.
So with all that in place, we should be able to sign in if we do enter a valid password,
let's give this a try.
So keep in mind my email is test2 and I used tester as a password and first of all I will try a wrong
email, I'm redirected back to login
so this didn't seem to succeed.
We can also quickly go to the sessions and clear all sessions here so that we can really prove that
no session was created.
So now let me enter a valid email but an incorrect password and I'm again redirected back and no session
was created here
but now let me enter the valid email and the valid password
and now I'm on the starting page.
I see all options which is looking good,
we get no error here
and if I have a look at my sessions collection, we've got a session here because now I am logged in,
this is the user object with which I'm logged in,
so this is correct
and now we got a working login flow, taking into account our email and so on.